---
layout: post
title:  "Vote Line A"
date:   2022-01-01 00:00:00 -0400
categories: 
thumbnail: "/assets/heros/Vote Line A.png"
---
For their 2019 and 2021 campaigns, the Ridgefield Democratic Town Committee hired me as graphic designer. My task was to create campaign print materials, posters, and web assets.

My approach was to collaborate with DTC members on a brand identity, including a recognizable color palette and type design as well as a handful of slogans and taglines. We darkened the Democratic Party blue to a rich navy for legibility, and generated a library of text boxes with subtle dimensionality and depth. Both these modal elements and our choice of typeface -- Barlow -- are pleasingly geometric but subtly personal.

The resulting print materials are confident, eye-catching, and ever-so-slightly playful.

When designing lawn signs, we expanded the color palette to a range of dark, cool colors. Were the signs monochromatic, a viewer might glance over a sign they hadn't seen before, thinking it already seen.

My 2021 refinement of Vote Line A doubled down on its tessellated elements and re-emphasized the Ridgefield DTC logo.

I replaced the warm, blocky typeface with a pair -- one defiant, one classy -- that exist alongside each other in the type hierarchy. This allows for greater visual distinction between text elements without too many competing sizes, maintaining a clean appearance.

The print materials' principally white background enhances legibility for visually imparired constituents, while subtle "sticker" shadows restore visual depth and tastefully delineate between neighboring elements.

I updated the lawn signs with the same new typeface, but with a lighter weight to compensate for the text's smaller size. Now, the signs are visually differentiated by not only their background color but their tile layout; consistency is maintained by the tagline and prominent logo.

This logo is not my design, but I recreated and refined it for use in this campaign, fixing subtle asymmetries and inconsistencies in stroke weight.